Ben Stokes has seen his Ashes participation and position as the England Test vice‑captain thrown into jeopardy after being arrested in Bristol in the early hours of Monday morning. A 27‑year‑old man was taken to hospital after the incident. Stokes, 26, was arrested by Avon and Somerset police on suspicion of causing actual bodily harm at 2.35am and spent the night in custody before being released under investigation without charge. He had been out after England’s 124-run win against West Indies on Sunday. England withdrew the all-rounder from Wednesday’s fourth one-day international at The Oval along with his team-mate Alex Hales, who was present at the time of the incident but is understood to be a witness. Both players missed training on Tuesday, Hales having voluntarily returned to Bristol to give a statement to police. The news broke on the day England’s selectors were picking their squad for this winter’s Ashes defence – they name the touring party at 10am on Wednesday – with Andrew Strauss, the director of cricket, instructing the panel to make their deliberations as if Stokes was fit and available. Whether this is the case remains shrouded in doubt. Strauss declined to confirm or deny suggestions that Stokes had undergone an x-ray on a hand following the incident, while there will also be a wait to see if he is charged before the squad depart for Australia on 28 October. Strauss met Stokes in Bristol on Monday evening after his release and confirmed the England and Wales Cricket Board will be launching its own investigation. Whether Stokes remains as Test vice‑captain will hinge on the outcome of this. The Guardian understands Stokes and Hales were two of at least seven England players out after their win at the County Ground on Sunday, with no curfew having been put in place by the team’s head coach, Trevor Bayliss. Stokes and Hales separated from the rest of the pack and were in the Mbargo nightclub before the incident that occurred outside it in the Queens Road and Clifton Triangle area of Bristol. Hales was witness to events but understood not to be involved directly after initially walking away. The 28-year-old went back to the team hotel after the arrest of Stokes to inform the team management of what had taken place, while the complainant was taken to Bristol Royal Infirmary. Hales returned to Bristol on Tuesday instead of attending training. Despite going out with England’s permission and having not broken any rules on a night when team-mates were also out late, he was still omitted from Wednesday’s match. The Guardian has learned that players were on Tuesday night subject to disciplinary proceedings by England. Jake Ball, the seam bowler, was among them, having been pictured earlier with Stokes, Hales and Jimmy Anderson (who had been summarising for Sky). Eoin Morgan, the England one-day captain, confirmed that Jason Roy will take Hales’s place as opener for the match and admitted that the team’s preparations had been affected. He said: “It is a big blow. It has been a distraction over the last day or so, but these things happen. Distractions arise – it’s one of the challenges of playing international sport, or professional sport. But certainly losing a guy like Ben Stokes is a big one. It’s a member of our team, a pretty crucial member – and we’re all in it together.” As well as proving to be a headache to the England management in a one-day series they lead 2-0 with two to play – Sam Billings of Kent was drafted into the squad overnight – the timing could not be worse as they look to plan for the Ashes in Australia. The incident and the fact players were out in the small hours midway through a series will also bring into question the culture of a limited-overs team who have been on an upward trajectory since theirharrowing group-stage exit from the 2015 World Cup. Stokes in particular will need to consider his off-field behaviour once more, having been sent home from an England Lions tour to Australia in 2013 along with Matt Coles of Kent following a string of late nights. It is understood he wasrecently warned by his agent, International Sports Management, after being seen out late during the Old Trafford Test match against South Africa during the summer. England had believed Stokes to have turned a corner in this regard, installing him as Test vice‑captain to Joe Root in February following Alastair Cook’s resignation after four years in charge. Bayliss, the head coach, has long talked up his leadership, both in the dressing room and as an inspirational all-rounder on the field. Such qualities will be required in Australia when the five-Test series starts in Brisbane on 23 November and with the scrutiny on touring cricketers at its highest. The selectors were already facing a tough meeting in London on Tuesday afternoon, with the batting lineup of particular concern.