John Green, the psychologist who leads the mental health response to the Grenfell fire, says the disaster has transformed the local NHS trust into “the largest trauma service in the UK”. It’s not just the survivors of the fire who are affected. Many people in the community are haunted by what they saw, smelled, felt, heard, learned and imagined that appalling night and in those dreadful following days. The singularity of Grenfell is that those affected are concentrated in a stable community. It’s not like the typical terror attack, which will usually strike many people from disparate places just visiting or passing through. Grenfell is tightly knit – a dense site of shared trauma. There are some advantages to this. Rather as with people who have been in a war, who can support one another in a way no one else can, there is no shortage of others who understand. Yet the disadvantages are very great. These people are still in the heart of the site of the trauma. There are daily reminders of unspeakable horror and loss. “Trigger warnings” are discussed a great deal in the contemporary world. For a lot of traumatised people, that blackened tower remains a trigger. Any trauma expert – and many of them have offered their services to the Grenfell community – will tell you that the first thing to do when helping people to recover is to attend to their immediate safety and security, so that they can feel some agency over their lives. Yet being in temporary accommodation is the opposite of that. Six months after the fire, as Pilgrim Tucker reported here on Thursday, the vast majority of survivors have not been rehoused. This too is a major disadvantage of a concentrated disaster. Social housing is hard to come by in Britain, harder to come by in London, and almost impossible to come by in a wealthy area of the city such as Kensington and Chelsea. This does not mean the problem with rehousing survivors is insurmountable. It means that it was eminently predictable. Again, British engineering has so far failed to rise to the challenge. You wouldn’t imagine it from nearly 50 years of bellyaching by the UK government and most local authorities, but cheap, quick, decent housing is not hard to supply. Many options for off-site prefabricated homes are available. Creekside Wharf, a modular development going up fast on a small piece of land in Greenwich, south-east London, is designed to provide 249 homes. It’s a tall building, at 23 storeys, and one can understand why Grenfell survivors might shrink from living that way again. But other people in flats and flatshares in the borough would have been glad to move, to help survivors of the disaster. In a whole community that has suffered an extraordinary blow, there is no shortage of people willing to muck in. That goodwill was never tapped as enthusiastically as it could have been. The problem all along has been a lack of vision, imagination and simple belief from central and local government in the idea that solutions at scale are possible. Grenfell’s survivors are being treated simply as people on the housing list who have to be patient like everyone else, not people who could be vulnerable to continuing or exploding trauma with every day of waiting in limbo. What must it be like, for month after month, as the temporary hardens around you – and summer, autumn and winter pass without any tangible idea of what the future might look like? Meanwhile, all around are tangible reminders of the horror you lived through. At one point there was some sort of target for every Grenfell survivor who wanted to move into a new home to be rehoused by Christmas. Instead, the dead have been counted and the living left to ponder the notion that they don’t count very much at all. Even now, it doesn’t have to be that way. Sure, a lot of time has been lost, and that’s shameful. But there’s no better moment than now to decide that the next six months should demonstrate how much can be done, as the last have shown how little can be. Things felt urgent in the days and weeks after the fire. The truth is that they are more urgent now than ever. There’s a growing understanding, especially in the United States, that simply being disadvantaged in cities (even without a seismic event such as Grenfell) can be distressing enough to induce post-traumatic stress disorder – which, untreated, helps to perpetuate a cycle of misery, violence, failure and shame. One of the worst things about society today is that insight into the human condition abounds, yet when it matters those insights are dismissed in favour of wilful ignorance. It is sometimes too late for healing to start; it was for the victims of the fire. But it is not too late for the survivors.