In early summer last year, the higher education sector was rocked by the resignation of the leading feminist academic Sara Ahmed from her post at Goldsmiths, University of London. Ahmed was protesting against what she claimed was a failure to address the problem of sexual harassment in the world of academia. “I am not talking about one rogue individual, or two, nor even a rogue unit, nor even a rogue institution,” she wrote in a blog. “We are talking about how sexual harassment becomes normalised and generalised as part of academic culture.” Goldsmiths had found itself at the heart of the scandal after a number of students made complaints of sexual harassment, sexual misconduct and bullying against staff. A Guardian investigation revealed the university had paid out almost £200,000 in compensation over six years, but details were shrouded in secrecy because of the use of non-disclosure agreements (NDAs). Since then Goldsmiths has tried to learn from experience and position itself as a leader in the handling of cases of sexual harassment and misconduct. This began with a 10-point plan for tackling the problem, which led to the creation of a new post for a sexual harassment strategy and review manager. Vicki Baars, who has eight years’ experience working in equality, diversity and inclusion in higher education, was appointed to lead a review. The work is ongoing, and involves the development of a new reporting framework, the creation of a comprehensive policy on sexual harassment, violence and misconduct, and the rollout of training and workshops for students and staff. “Previously we had a formal-process-or-nothing approach whereby you had to submit a complaint before anything was taken seriously,” Baars said. “But what we want is to begin to address these issues before they get to the formal stages of a complaint.” An online reporting tool is being trialled and will launch in the coming weeks, offering access to appropriate support. In addition, the university now has seven sexual violence liaison officers (SVLOs) who are highly trained in how to respond to disclosures. Significantly, Goldsmiths is committed to providing awareness training to staff across the institution, from intensive six-day courses for SVLOs, full-day training for staff most likely to be approached by students needing support, and 90-minute briefing sessions for everyone else. Students are also being paid to lead consent and bystander intervention workshops for peers, rather than relying on volunteers, in an attempt to formalise student-led training and improve information given to classmates. There have also been small but significant changes to the disciplinary process. At a formal hearing, the complainant is no longer required to be in the same room as the staff member against whom they have brought the complaint. Goldsmiths now ensures that an investigating officer will have had no previous involvement with the parties in the case to ensure impartiality. Previously, a head of department would typically have performed this role. “I saw this as an opportunity to be part of large-scale change in the sector,” said Baars, who is impressed by Goldsmiths’ long-term commitment to change. However, she is concerned that much of the investment elsewhere in the sector may be short-term, and limited by the funding available. Elisabeth Hill, a deputy warden at Goldsmiths, said the university wanted meaningful change that put victims at the heart of the process, rather than a “sticking plaster quick-fix”. And she said there was a new commitment to transparency. “We would struggle to see a situation where we would use NDAs in future. They are counterproductive. We need to make sure the process is fair and transparent.” Hills said it had been uncomfortable acknowledging the shortcomings of the past, but expressed gratitude to Ahmed and other campaigners whose efforts had focused attention on the sector’s failure to properly address sexual misconduct. “There have been a lot of changes. What will be really interesting is how that change embeds. This is too important for just a quick fix.”  Sarah Green, co-director of the End Violence Against Women Coalition, welcomed the progress at Goldsmiths and elsewhere, but urged vice-chancellors to keep the issue of sexual harassment as a priority. “We know that many universities are at least now tracking levels of reports and seeking out expert advice for staff training. But this still tends to be voluntary activity and we still hear about harassment and assaults which simply should not happen in universities.”