Walter Swinburn died in a fall from his bathroom window in what was ruled to be an accident by a coroner’s court on Thursday. Dr Shirley Radcliffe ruled the 55-year-old former jockey, made famous by his association with Shergar, died as the result of head injuries and said there was no evidence he had intended to take his own life. “She confirmed he had fallen from his bathroom window,” a coroner’s officer reported. “The drop was estimated at about 12 feet and it was into a courtyard. It was confirmed Mr Swinburn suffered from epilepsy but whether or not he had an epileptic fit, which caused him to fall, was not possible to determine.” Swinburn’s accident occurred at his maisonette in Belgravia, central London, on 12 December. He was found by his father, Wally, a former champion jockey in Ireland, who reportedly had to force an entry into the home after arriving to check on his son’s wellbeing. One theory, apparently suggested by Wally, is that Swinburn was trying to close the window and may have been rendered unsteady by a recent epileptic fit, causing him to lose his balance. Police and paramedics attended but Swinburn was pronounced dead at the scene. Swinburn was regarded as perhaps the best big-race jockey of his generation, assisted by an exceptional coolness under pressure. He was 19 when he won the Derby on Shergar by a record 10 lengths and won the race twice more, on Shahrastani and Lammtarra. His other major successes included the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe on All Along and a Breeders’ Cup Turf on Pilsudski. He was left in a coma for four days after a shocking fall at the start of a race in Hong Kong in 1996, which is thought to have been the cause of his epilepsy. He made three comebacks of various lengths and retired in 2000. Might Bite delivered a performance that will make him a contender for the Cheltenham Festival next month when scoring by 99 lengths at Doncaster on Thursday. The novice chaser was left with a straightforward task when the more talented of his only two rivals fell before the home turn. There was no indication in his jumping that he lacked confidence after his own fall at Kempton over Christmas, which happened when he was 18 lengths clear in a Grade One and about to score impressively. At the time, much criticism was directed at Daryl Jacob, his jockey, for riding Might Bite so vigorously at the final obstacle when victory was assured and there was no need to ask for an attacking leap. Nico de Boinville, recently returned from injury and back in the saddle here, provided an explanation for Jacob, telling the horse’s owners as soon as he dismounted that Might Bite “needs to have his mind made up for him” on the approach to fences and makes mistakes when left to his own devices. “He’s a lovely horse, it was just a case of getting his confidence back,” De Boinville said. “I think in those better races we’ll see even more from him. He really appreciates going on and being ridden quite aggressively because then his jumping really comes to hand. He’s a horse we’ve always thought has got an awful lot of potential and I think he’s going the right way again. It’s just a case of keeping him low and flat and not letting him get too high in the air and overjumping.” Might Bite was cut by most firms for the RSA Chase at the festival, which is said to be his most likely target, although he still holds an entry in the JLT. One firm, 32Red, took the contrary view and pushed his RSA odds out to a top price of 11-2 from 5-1. Toby Lawes, assistant to the winning trainer, Nicky Henderson, said: “It was a really good confidence-giver. It was all about getting him into his rhythm, letting him rock‘n’roll and do what he does best, so we were thrilled with that. It was exactly what we wanted to do. He was a little bit stiff and sore and our physios have done a fantastic job and thankfully it didn’t knock any of his enthusiasm for jumping. Hopefully he’ll go for the RSA.” Bangor 1.50 Over To Sam 2.20 Sainte Ladylime 2.50 Dashing Oscar 3.20 Lord Heathfield 3.55 Hollywood All Star 4.25 Hands Of Stone 5.00 Poole Master (nb) Kempton 1.40 Grand Coureur 2.10 Ballymountain Boy 2.40 Captain Buck’s 3.10 Brandon Hill 3.45 One Of Us (nap) 4.15 Politologue 4.50 Whatswrongwithyou Newcastle 5.45 A Boy Named Sue 6.15 Mia Wallace 6.45 Major Jumbo 7.15 Hot Natured 7.45 Out Of Order 8.15 Foresight Southwell 1.30 Stonecoldsoba 2.00 Trenchard 2.30 Dark Forest 3.00 Lady Nayef 3.35 Piazon 4.05 Start Seven 4.40 Luv U Always