Harry Styles’ emancipation from the X Factor-created, boy band juggernaut that is/was (they’re on “hiatus”) One Direction has been a masterclass in earnest repositioning. Last September he was interviewed by Paul McCartney for the high-end fashion magazine Another Man, while Cameron Crowe – whose 2000 film, Almost Famous, chronicling the 1970s US rock scene you assume the floppy-haired Styles has seen once or twice – came out of semi-retirement to profile him for Rolling Stone. Styles’ self-titled debut album, meanwhile, carries the rustic waft of authenticity, all slowly unfurling ballads (his recent UK number 1 single Sign of the Times clocks in at a bum-numbing six minutes), clattering rock songs mentioning “hard liquor”, and broad lyrical motifs about good girls who are devils in the bedroom. This, he is at pains to make very clear, is a very different Styles. So his debut solo show in the UK doesn’t take place at the usual One Direction arenas but in north London’s the Garage, a 600-capacity sweatbox that later this month will host the indie also-rans The View. But for all that promise of artistic transformation (“a true rock & roll prince” as Rolling Stone would have him), the lilting opener Ever Since New York, complete with an arm-swaying chorus, could easily have nestled on the last two One Direction albums, the clusters of hysterical fans who scrambled to get tickets filming everything for posterity while roaring back every lyric. The sashaying Carolina, whose central riff belongs to Stuck in the Middle With You, and the atmospheric Meet Me in the Hallway are dashed off quickly, the nerves jangling, before the hardcore fans get what they really want: some interaction. “I’m Harry, nice to meet you,” he says in his neon pink, satin suit, the new 2017 reincarnation finally stepping forward. From there he seems to relax, steadily settling into a new stage arrangement that doesn’t leave, as he puts it, any room to prance (“I like to prance,” he reiterates). To be fair, his songs don’t often require that much prancing; Woman is a loping, Benny and the Jets-style stomper; the limp Two Ghosts is beige Beck; while an unexpected cover of Kanye West’s Ultralight Beam sees all the original’s gospel uplift deflated by Kings of Leon dad-rock posturing. More often than not, he’s also stuck behind an over-sized guitar (the ex-boyband members’ weapon of choice in today’s authenticity wars), which occasionally gives him the air of a handsome actor playing a rock star in a Hollywood biopic; he’s doing the right moves, it just doesn’t always come naturally. He seems much more comfortable with tonight’s other cover, a fairly straight version of One Direction’s Stockholm Syndrome (“you may or may not know the words,” he deadpans) from 2014’s underrated Four album. Having acknowledged the past he seems to loosen up still further, the unadorned Sweet Creature showcasing his lovely, slightly world-worn vocal, while Kiwi – which unsuccessfully aims for Arctic Monkey’s-style swagger on record – rattles along at such a pace the crowd morphs into something more befitting of the Garage’s indie heritage. One piece of rock frontman showmanship is out of the question, however. Acknowledging last week’s New York show, which ended with an attempted stage-dive and his Gucci loafer making contact with a fan’s head, he rules out a repeat performance: “It doesn’t feel as cool as you think it would.” As he returns for an encore, there are hints of that rock’n’roll swagger finally peeping through the boyband training, however. With screams reaching deafening proportions, and sweat pooling on the floor, he says, “I’m a narcissist so I’ll need more than that”, before Sign of the Times kickstarts a mass singalong that tickles the hairs on the back of your neck. It’s a rousing, uplifting finale to a gig that saw its star – and he is a proper star – eventually find his footing.