Comeuppance for a corporate bully rarely arrives so swiftly or so elegantly. Boeing attempted to kill Bombardier’s C-Series plane in its infancy by getting US trade authorities to impose stiff import tariffs. Now those heavy-handed legal tactics have produced an outcome that could be damaging in the long-term for Boeing. Arch-rival Airbus has swooped from the wings to grab majority control of the C-Series and proclaim that the 300% tariffs can be side-stepped via the simple remedy of conducting the final assembly of planes destined for US customers in Alabama. If Airbus’s plan works, it’s ingenious. It will get a 50.1% stake in the C-Series without paying a penny and will collect some cheap warrants on Bombardier’s shares. Bombardier wins in the sense that it now has a partner with the financial muscle and supply chains to make a success of the C-Series. True, the Canadian firm has to accept that its stake in the C-Series will be diluted from 62% to 31%, but it can console itself that something is better than nothing, which was the likely alternative. Finally, production jobs on the C-Series programme – including 1,000 at the Bombardier factory in Belfast – should be better protected. Is Airbus’s manoeuvre too clever by half? That was gist of Boeing’s predictable grumble. “This looks like a questionable deal between two heavily state-subsidised competitors to skirt the recent findings of the US government,” it said. We’ll ignore the absurdity of Boeing complaining about subsidies and wait to see how its complaint plays out. Until clarity arrives, the GMB union representing workers in Belfast is right to caution that it hopes Airbus’s legal advice is solid. But, on the face of it, it’s hard to see why US trade rules would stop a plane being assembled in the US for the use of US airlines. If, as Airbus and Bombardier hope, the C-Series and some politically-sensitive jobs have been saved, Theresa May may wish to reflect on one moral of the tale. Her personal appeals to a protectionist US president got nowhere. It was Airbus, supposedly a lumbering exercise in pan-European co-operation, that knew how to play the game. It is now odds-on that interest rates will rise on 2 November for the first time since 2007. Inflation, on the CPI measure, stood at 3% in September and Bank of England governor Mark Carney expects it to go higher. Indeed, when giving evidence to the Treasury select committee, Carney sounded like a man whose mind is settled. The inflationary effects of last year’s post-referendum fall in sterling will take three years to work their way through the economy, he argued. That is starting to sound like the majority view. Economists at Barclays reckon there is just one dove left on the nine-strong rate-setting committee – David Ramsden, one of the two new members. There are two ways to view the Bank’s approach to this point. A generous interpretation says Carney & co have skilfully prepared the ground. The market, which only a few months ago was expecting rates to remain at 0.25% until the end of next year, has been given time to adjust to the new thinking. An alternative view says the Bank has boxed itself into a corner unnecessarily. By talking up the prospect of a rate-rise, the Bank has to deliver in a fortnight’s time or lose its credibility and risk another sharp reverse in the value of sterling, which would squeeze real incomes at a bad moment. There was a better way. The August 2016 cut to 0.25% should have been reversed at the start of this year when the post-referendum slump failed to materialise. That would have avoided the current mini-drama over what is, after all, a modest tweak to monetary policy. Merlin Entertainments used to argue that its theme parks and attractions, such as the London Eye, Legoland and Gardaland in Italy, were so popular that terrorist attacks in the UK and the rest of Europe only had a temporary effect on visitor numbers. It’s telling a different story now. Terrorism “at record levels of intensity in Europe” has produced “difficult” trading conditions. Shares slumped 16%. Yet the market’s reaction looks odd. Merlin didn’t actually move its profit forecasts very far. Top-line profits of £489m for 2017 had been expected but the company says £470m-£480m is now more likely. The slight difference doesn’t obviously justify a double-digit reaction in the share price, especially as securing a licence to open Peppa Pig attractions outside the UK looks a smart piece of business. Parents will probably hate the things, but that’s another story.